[DPE-6460] Add documentation for TLS (#43)
canonical/charmed-etcd-operator: docs/tls/disable-tls.md

# Disable encryption with TLS

> To diable encryption with TLS, you can remove the relation between the `charmed-etcd` and the TLS provider on the endpoint specific to the peer-to-peer or client-to-server communication.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To disable encryption with TLS, remove the relation between `charmed-etcd` and the TLS provider on the endpoint specific to the peer-to-peer or client-to-server communication.
```

charmed-etcd/1               active    idle   2        10.73.32.131
charmed-etcd/2               active    idle   3        10.73.32.193
self-signed-certificates/0*  active    idle   0        10.73.32.179

Machine  State    Address       Inst id        Base          AZ  Message
0        started  10.73.32.179  juju-5620b5-0  ubuntu@22.04      Running
1        started  10.73.32.122  juju-5620b5-1  ubuntu@24.04      Running
2        started  10.73.32.131  juju-5620b5-2  ubuntu@24.04      Running
3        started  10.73.32.193  juju-5620b5-3  ubuntu@24.04      Running

Integration provider                   Requirer                          Interface         Type     Message
charmed-etcd:etcd-peers                charmed-etcd:etcd-peers           etcd_peers        peer
charmed-etcd:restart                   charmed-etcd:restart              rolling_op        peer
self-signed-certificates:certificates  charmed-etcd:client-certificates  tls-certificates  regular
self-signed-certificates:certificates  charmed-etcd:peer-certificates    tls-certificates  regular
```

You can disable peer-to-peer encryption alone, client-to-server encryption alone, or both at the same time.

> ## Disable Peer-to-Peer Encryption in Transit

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Disable peer-to-peer encryption in transit
```

> To disable the peer-to-peer communication, run:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To disable peer-to-peer communication, run:
```

```shell
juju remove-relation self-signed-certificates charmed-etcd:peer-certificates
```

> You can wait for the relation to be removed by checking the status using `juju status --watch 1s --relations`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can check the status of the relation using `juju status --watch 1s --relations`.
```

charmed-etcd/0*              active    idle   1        10.73.32.122
charmed-etcd/1               active    idle   2        10.73.32.131
charmed-etcd/2               active    idle   3        10.73.32.193
self-signed-certificates/0*  active    idle   0        10.73.32.179

Machine  State    Address       Inst id        Base          AZ  Message
0        started  10.73.32.179  juju-5620b5-0  ubuntu@22.04      Running
1        started  10.73.32.122  juju-5620b5-1  ubuntu@24.04      Running
2        started  10.73.32.131  juju-5620b5-2  ubuntu@24.04      Running
3        started  10.73.32.193  juju-5620b5-3  ubuntu@24.04      Running

Integration provider                   Requirer                          Interface         Type     Message
charmed-etcd:etcd-peers                charmed-etcd:etcd-peers           etcd_peers        peer
charmed-etcd:restart                   charmed-etcd:restart              rolling_op        peer
self-signed-certificates:certificates  charmed-etcd:client-certificates  tls-certificates  regular
```

Notice that the relation between `self-signed-certificates` and `charmed-etcd` for the peer-to-peer communication has been removed.

> ## Disable Client-to-Server Encryption in Transit and Mutual Authentication

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Disable client-to-server encryption in transit and mutual authentication
```

You can verify that the cluster is running without encryption by checking checking the member list using the `etcdctl` command.

```shell
etcdctl member list --endpoints http://10.73.32.122:2379 -w table
+------------------+---------+---------------+--------------------------+--------------------------+------------+
|        ID        | STATUS  |     NAME      |        PEER ADDRS        |       CLIENT ADDRS       | IS LEARNER |
+------------------+---------+---------------+--------------------------+--------------------------+------------+
| 68327020b9432fc8 | started | charmed-etcd2 | http://10.73.32.193:2380 | http://10.73.32.193:2379 |      false |
| c5aec105e79a433b | started | charmed-etcd1 | http://10.73.32.131:2380 | http://10.73.32.131:2379 |      false |
| c74cb15a5aeade42 | started | charmed-etcd0 | http://10.73.32.122:2380 | http://10.73.32.122:2379 |      false |
+------------------+---------+---------------+--------------------------+--------------------------+------------+
```

Notice that the cluster is running without encryption. Both the `PEER ADDRS` and `CLIENT ADDRS` are using the HTTP protocol.

> ## Disbaling both Peer-to-Peer and Client-to-Server Encryption at The Same Time

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Disable both peer-to-peer and client-to-server encryption at the same time
```

You can disable both peer-to-peer and client-to-server communication at the same time by removing both relations.

```shell
juju remove-relation self-signed-certificates charmed-etcd:peer-certificates && juju remove-relation self-signed-certificates charmed-etcd:client-certificates
```

> ## Rotating the TLS Certificates

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Rotate the TLS certificates
```

> There are two scenarios trigger the rotation of TLS certificates:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two scenarios that may trigger the rotation of TLS certificates:
```

> 1. The certificate has expired/is about to expire: In this case, the Charmed etcd will automatically request a new certificate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The certificate has expired/is about to expire: In this case, Charmed etcd will automatically request a new certificate.
```
